## Image compression by seam carving

> Suppose that you are given a color picture consisting of an $m \times n$ array
> $A[1:m, 1:n]$ of pixels, where each pixel specifies a triple of red, green
> blue (RGB) intensities. You want to compress this picture slightly, by
> removing one pixel from each of the $m$ rows, so that the whole picture
> becomes one pixel narrower. To avoid incongruous visual effects, however, the
> pixels removed in two adjacent rows must lie in either the same column or
> adjacent columns. In this way, the pixels removed form a "seam" from the top
> row to the bottom row, where successive pixels in the seam are adjacent
> vertically or diagonally.
>
> 1. Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least exponentially in
>    $m$, assuming that $n > 1$.
> 2. Suppose now that along with each pixel $A[i, j]$, you are given a
>    real-valued disruption measure $d[i, j]$, indicating how disruptive it
>    would be to remove the pixel $A[i, j]$. Intuitively, the lower a pixel's
>    disruption measure, the more similar the pixel is to its neighbors. Define
>    the disruption measure of a seam as the sum of the disruption measures of
>    its pixels. <p>Give an algorithm to find a seam with the lower disruption
>    measure. How efficient is your algorithm?

For the first part, it's fairly obvious – for each subsequent row we can choose
from at least 2 pixels. This means that there are $\Theta(2^m)$ possible seams.

The second part is simple enough as well. I will not implement it, but just
describe it.

1. We create an m-by-n table that will store the best possible seam starting
   from the bottom and ending on that pixel.
2. We start with the bottom row and fill it with the disruption of removing that
   pixel.
3. For each previous row, we iterate the pixels, and of each pixel we choose the
   adjacent pixel in the next row that minimizes the disruption and we add it to
   the disruption of the pixel we're examining.
4. Once we fill in the whole table, the top row will contain the minimal
   disruption for each seam that ends on a given pixel. If we need to construct
   the seam (as opposed to just calculate the minimum disruption), we could pick
   the pixel with the minimal disruption value and start tracing backwards (or
   just maintain a decision table).
