> Suppose that instead of each node $x$ keeping the attribute $x.p$ pointing to
> $x$'s parent, it keeps $x.succ$, pointing to $x$'s successor. Give pseudocode
> for `SEARCH`, `INSERT`, and `DELETE` on a binary search tree $T$ using this
> representation. These procedures should operate in time $\O(h)$, where $h$ is
> the height of the tree $T$. (_Hint:_ You may wish to implement a subroutine
> that returns the parent of a node.)

I've got to admit, I was skeptical about this one. It was quite a good exercise,
however, as it forces you to internalize a lot about binary search trees and
their predecessor/successor invariants.

The pseudocode and the C code differ a bit, as the C code is a bit more
complicated to avoid a few extra steps. It even can be optimized a bit further,
but it's not worth the complexity. The asymptotic bounds are going to be the
same as the pseudocode

### Some thoughts

I pondered a bit about why it would be useful to keep track of the successor
instead of the parent. I may be missing something, but I can find a single
advantage – the tree can be walked inorder without extra space and a bit more
optimally. Another benefit is that it simplifies finding the successor of the
deleted node in `DELETE`. Apart from that, not keeping track of the parent
introduces some overhead, especially when deleting.

### Notable differences

The pseudocode needs two change in two significant ways:

* As the parent is no longer findable through a pointer, we need to walk the
  three from the root and find it. On the flip side, we don't need to update
  parent pointers.

* Whenever we remove a node, we need to preserve the invariant of the successor
  field. This means that we need to find the predecessor of the node we are
  deleting, and have it successor point to the deleted node's successor.

### Pseudocode

`SEARCH` remains unchanged:

    TREE-SEARCH(x, k)
        if x = NIL or k == x.key
            return x
        if k < x.key
            return TREE-SEARCH(x.left, k)
        else
            return TREE-SEARCH(x.right, k)

`INSERT` needs to allocate the correct successor of the newly inserted node and
update it's predecessor. Since we're only inserting leaf nodes, both predecessor
and successor are findable through their invariants:

* The predecessor is going to be the last parent at which we branched right. It
  might be the parent of the inserted node, if we put it at the left position.

* The successor is going to be the last parent at which at branched left.

* Notably, we don't need to explore the new node's children, as they don't exist
  because it's a leaf node.

    TREE-INSERT(T, z)
        y = NIL
        x = T.root
        pred = NIL

        while x != NIL
            y = x
            if z.key < x.key
                z.succ = x
                x = x.left
            else
                pred = x
                x = x.right

        if y == NIL
            T.root = z
        else if z.key < y.key
            y.left = z
        else
            y.right = z
            pred = y

        if pred != NIL
            pred.succ = z

The final one, `DELETE` is a bit more complicated. It needs `TREE-PARENT`, that
finds the parent of a node, starting from the root, and `TREE-PREDECESSOR` that
finds finds the predecessor of a node, starting from the root. It also needs
a modified version of `TRANSPLANT`. Since those are pretty self-explanatory,
let's start with `DELETE` and explore them afterwards.

It's worth noting that we don't need to call `TREE-MINIMUM` on `z.right` in the
two-children case, as we already know its successor.

    TREE-DELETE(T, z)
        pred = TREE-PREDECESSOR(z)

        if z.left == NIL
            TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.right)
        else if z.right == NIL
            TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.left)
        else
            y = z.succ

            if (z.right != y)
                TRANSPLANT(T, y, y.right)
                y.right = z.right

            TRANSPLANT(T, z, y)
            y.left = z.left

        if pred != NIL
            pred.succ = z.succ

Node that `y.p != z` needs to be changed to `z.right != y`, which means the same
thing.

`TRANSPLANT` now needs to explicitly find the parent:

    TRANSPLANT(T, u, v)
        p = TREE-PARENT(T, u)

        if p == NIL
            T.root = v
        else if u == p.left
            p.left = v
        else
            p.right = v

The notable change here is that we don't need to update the `v`'s parent, as we
don't keep track of it.

Finally, `TREE-PREDECESSOR` is fairly needs to start from the root, instead of
the node:

    TREE-PREDECESSOR(T, x)
        y = NIL
        z = T.root

        while z != x
            if z.key < x.key
                y = z
                z = z.right
            else
                z = z.left

        z = z.left

        while z != NIL
            y = z
            z = z.right

        return y

The first loop traverses the tree from the root to `x`, keeping track of the
last right branch to mark it as a potential predecessor. When it finishes, `z`
equals `x`. If there is no left child, we're done, and the ancestor is the
predecessor. If there is a left child, we follow it and keep going left, until
there are no no mode left children to follow. The last is essentially what
`TREE-MINIMUM` does. We could change the order of the loops (find the minimum of
the left child and go through the root only if it doesn't exist). While it will
improve the constant, it's asymptotically the same.

The C code merges `TREE-PREDECESSOR` and `TREE-PARENT` into one.

It's pretty easy to illustrate that the result is $\O(h)$, so I won't bother.
