## Probabilistic lower bounds on comparison sorting

> In this problem, we prove a probabilistic $\Omega(n\lg{n})$ on the running
> time of any deterministic or randomized comparison sort on $n$ distinct input
> elements. We begin by examining a deterministic comparison sort $A$ with
> decision tree $T_A$. We assume that every permutation of $A$'s inputs is
> equally likely.
>
> 1. Suppose that each leaf of $T_A$ is labeled with the probability that it is
>    reached given a random input. Prove that exactly $n!$ leaves are labeled
>    $1/n!$ and the rest are labeled $0$.
> 2. Let $D(T)$ denote the external path length of a decision tree $T$; that
>    is, $D(T)$ is the sum of the depths of all the leaves of $T$. Let $T$ be a
>    decision tree with $k > 1$ leaves, and let $LT$ and $RT$ be the left and
>    right subtrees of $T$. Show that $D(T) = D(LT) + D(RT) + k$
> 3. Let $d(k)$ be the minimum value of $D(T)$ over all decision trees $T$ with
>    $k > 1$ leaves. Show that $d(k) = \min_{1 \le i \le k - 1} \\{d(i) +
>    d(k-i) + k\\}$. (<i>Hint</i>: Consider a decision tree $T$ with $k$
>    leaves that achieves the minimum. Let $i_0$ be the number of leaves in
>    $LT$ and $k - i_0$ the number of leaves in $RT$.)
> 4. Prove that for a given value of $k > 1$ and $i$ in the range $i \le i \le
>    k - 1$, the function $i\lg{i} + (k-i)\lg(k-i)$ is minimized at $i = k/2$.
>    Conclude that $d(k) = \Omega(k\lg{k})$.
> 5. Prove that $D(T_A) = \Omega(n!\lg(n!))$, and conclude that the
>    average-case time to sort $n$ elements is $\Omega(n\lg{n})$.
>
> Now consider a *randomized* comparison sort $B$. We can extend the
> decision-tree model to handle randomization by incorporating two kinds of
> nodes: ordinary comparison nodes and "randomization" nodes. A randomization
> node models a random choice of the form `RANDOM(1,r)` made by algorithm $B$;
> the node has $r$ children, each of which is equally likely to be chosen
> during an execution of the algorithm.
>
> 6. Show that for any randomized comparison sort $B$, there exists a deterministic
>    comparison sort $A$ whose expected number of comparisons is no more than
>    those made by $B$.

### Probability labels

There are $n!$ permutations that the algorithm can perform and each
corresponds to one of the $n!$ possible inputs. Each permutation will be a
leaf in this tree and since the inputs are equally likely, the probability of
reaching one will be $1/n!$. If the decision tree has more leaves, they will
be unreachable.

This is an intuitive argument. It's easy to see that it is so if you think
about it, but a formal proof seems tricky to me.

### External path length

If we take a node in the tree, all paths go either through the left or the
right child. Both children have the same paths as the node itself, except that
they are shorter by one. Thus, $D(T) = D(LT) + D(RT) +
\mathrm{LEAVES}(LT) + \mathrm{LEAVES}(RT) = D(LT) + D(RT) + k$.

### Minimal external path length

If we take a tree with $k$ leaves that achieves the minimal external path,
we know from the previous point that:

$$ D(T) = D(LT) + D(RT) + k $$

There are $k - 1$ possible pairs of left-right children and one of them is the
minimum. That is:

$$ d(k) = D(T) = D(LT) + D(RT) + k = \min_{1 \le i \le k-1}\\{d(i) + d(k-i) + k\\} $$

### Minimal value

Let:

$$ \begin{align}
      f(i) &= i\lg{i} + (k-i)\lg(k-i) \\\\
     f'(i) &= \lg{i} + 1 - \lg(k-i) - 1 = \lg\frac{i}{k-i} \\\\
     f'(i) = 0 & \Leftrightarrow \lg\frac{i}{k-i} = 0 \Rightarrow i/(k-i) = 1 \Rightarrow i = \frac k 2
   \end{align} $$

Since $f'(i)$ is monotonously increasing, $i = k/2$ is a local minimum.

Intuitively said, the minimum is reached when the tree is balanced (as in the
way merge sort halves is decision-tree on each step.

### Average-case time

In $T_A$ there are $n!$ leaves, thus $D(n) > d(k) = \Omega(n!\lg(n!))$. Each
permutation has an equal probability of $1/n!$, thus the expected time to sort
it is:

$$ \frac{\Omega(n!\lg(n!))}{n!} = \Omega(n\lg(n!)) = \Omega(n\lg{n}) $$

### The randomized algorithm

A deterministic algorithm $A$ corresponding to $B$ would be one that has made
its "random" choices in advance. To construct it we just remove the randomized
nodes by replacing them by a child we pick. The new result is a subtree (in
respect to the non-randomized nodes) and its number of choices is less than or
equal to the one of the randomized algorithm. Since any subtree we pick is
$\Omega(n\lg{n})$, this implies that $B$ is $\Omega(n\lg{n})$.
