## Correctness of bubblesort

> Bubblesort is popular, but inefficient, sorting algorithm. It works by
> repeatedly swapping adjancent elements that are out of order.
>
>     BUBBLESORT(A)
>       for i to A.length - 1
>           for j = A.length downto i + 1
>               if A[j] < A[j - 1]
>                   exchange A[j] with A[j - 1]
>
> 1. Let $A'$ denote the output of *BUBBLESORT(A)*. To prove that *BUBBLESORT*
>    is correct, we need to prove that it terminates and that
>
>    $$ A'[1] \leq A'[2] \leq \cdots \leq A'[n] \tag{2.3}$$
>
>    where $n = A.length$. In order to show that *BUBBLESORT* actually sorts,
>    what else do we need to prove?
>
> 2. State precisely a loop invariant for the **for** loop in lines 2-4, and
>    prove that this loop invariant holds. Your proof should use the structure
>    of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.
>
> 3. Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part (2),
>    state a loop invariant for the **for** loop in lines 1-4 that will allow
>    you to prove inequality (2.3). Your proof should use the structure of the
>    loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.
>
> 4. What is the worst-case running time of bubblesort? How does it compare to
>    the running time of insertion sort?

### 1. What else?

We need to prove that $A'$ consists of the original elements in $A$, although
in (possibly) different order.

### 2. Inner loop invariant

> At the start of each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 2-4, (1) the
> subarray $A[j...]$ consists of elements that were in $A[j...]$ before
> entering the inner loop (possibly) in different order and (2) $A[j]$ is the
> smallest of those elements.

**Initialization:** It holds trivially, because $A[j...]$ consists of only
one element and it is the last element of $A$ when execution starts the inner
loop.

**Maintenance:** On each step, we replace $A[j]$ with $A[j - 1]$ if it is
smaller. Because we're only adding the previous element and possibly swapping
two values (1) holds. Since $A[j-1]$ becomes the smallest of $A[j]$ and
$A[j-1]$ and the loop invariant states that $A[j]$ is the smallest one in
$A[j...]$, we know that (2) holds.

**Termination:** After the loop terminates, we will get $j = i$. This implies
that $A[i]$ is the smallest element of the subarray $A[i...]$ and array
contains the original elements in some order.

### 3. Outer loop invariant

> At the start of each iteration, $A[1..i-1]$ consists of sorted elements, all
> of which are smaller or equal to the ones in $A[i...]$.

**Initialization:** Initially we have the empty array, which holds trivially.

**Maintenance:** The invariant of the inner loop tells us that on each
iteration, $A[i]$ becomes the smallest element of $A[i...]$ while the rest get
shuffled. This impliest that at the end of the loop:

$$ A[i] < A[k] \text{, for } i < k $$

**Termination:** The loop terminates with $i = n$, where $n$ is the length of
the array. Substituting the $n$ for $i$ in the invariant, we have that the
subarray $A[1..n]$ consists of the original elements, but in sorted order.
This is the entire array, so the entire array is sorted.

### 4. Worst-case running time?

The number of comparisons is

$$ n - 1, n - 2, \cdots , 1 = \frac{n(n - 1)}{2} $$

Which is a quadratic function. The swaps are at most the same ammount, which
means that the worst-case complexity is $\Theta(n^2)$.

Insertion sort has the same worst-case complexity. In general, the best-case
complexity of both algorithms should be $\Theta(n)$, but this implementation
of bubble-sort has $\Theta(n^2)$ best-case complexity. That can be fixed by
returning if no swaps happened in an iteration of the outer loop.

Furthermore, bubble-sort should be even slower than insertion sort, because
the swaps imply a lot more assignments than what insertion sort does.
