## Inversions

> Let $A[1..n]$ be an array of $n$ distinct numbers. If $i < j$ and
> $A[i] > A[j]$, then the pair $(i, j)$ is called an inversion of $A$.
>
> 1. List the five inversions in the array $\langle 2, 3, 8, 6, 1 \rangle$.
> 2. What array with elements from the set $\lbrace 1, 2, \ldots, n \rbrace$
>    has the most inversions? How many does it have?
> 3. What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort and
>    the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.
> 4. Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any
>    permutation of n elements in $\Theta(n\lg{n})$ worst-case time. (Hint:
>    Modify merge sort).

### 1. The five inversions

$\langle 2, 1 \rangle$, $\langle 3, 1 \rangle$, $\langle 8, 6 \rangle$,
$\langle 8, 1 \rangle$ and $\langle 6, 1 \rangle$.

### 2. Array with most inversions

It is the reversed array, that is $\langle n, n-1, \ldots , 1 \rangle$. It has
$(n-1) + (n-2) + \cdots + 1 = \frac{n(n-1)}{2}$ inversions.

### 3. Relationship with insertion sort

Insertion sort performs the body of the inner loop once for each inversion.
Due to the nature of the algorithm, on each $k$-th iteration, if $A[1..k]$ has
$m$ inversions with $A[k]$, they are in $A[k-m..k-1]$ (since the elements
before $k$ are sorted). Thus, the inner loop needs to execute its body $m$
times. This process does not introduce new inversions and each outer loop
iteration resolves exactly $m$ inversions, where $m$ is the distance the
element is "pushed towards the front of the array".

Thus, the running time is $\Theta(n + d)$, where $d$ is the number of
inversions ($n$ comes from the outer loop).

### 4. Calculating inversions

We just modify merge sort (in exercise 2.3.2) to return the number of
inversions:

    MERGE-SORT(A, p, r):
      if p < r
          inversions = 0
          q = (p + r) / 2
          inversions += merge_sort(A, p, q)
          inversions += merge_sort(A, q + 1, r)
          inversions += merge(A, p, q, r)
          return inversions
      else
          return 0

    MERGE(A, p, q, r)
      n1 = q - p + 1
      n2 = r - q
      let L[1..n₁] and R[1..n₂] be new arrays
      for i = 1 to n₁
          L[i] = A[p + i - 1]
      for j = 1 to n₂
          R[j] = A[q + j]
      i = 1
      j = 1
      for k = p to r
          if i > n₁
              A[k] = R[j]
              j = j + 1
          else if j > n₂
              A[k] = L[i]
              i = i + 1
          else if L[i] ≤ R[j]
              A[k] = L[i]
              i = i + 1
          else
              A[k] = R[j]
              j = j + 1
              inversions += n₁ - i
      return inversions

