## Quicksort with equal element values

> The analysis of the expected running time of randomized quicksort in section
> 7.4.2 assumes that all element values are distinct. In this problem. we
> examine what happens when they are not.
>
> 1. Suppose that all element values are equal. What would be randomized
>    quick-sort's running time in this case?
> 2. The `PARTITION` procedure returns an index $q$ such that each element of
>    $A[p \ldots q - 1]$ is less than or equal to $A[q]$ and each element of
>    $A[q + 1 \ldots r]$ is greater than $A[q]$. Modify the `PARTITION`
>    procedure to produce a procedure `PARTITION'(A, p, r)` which permutes the
>    elements of $A[p \ldots r]$ and returns two indices $q$ and $t$ where $p
>    \le q \le t \le r$, such that:
>    <ul>
>      <li>all elements of $A[q \ldots t]$ are equal,</li>
>      <li>each element of $A[p \ldots q - 1]$ is less than $A[q]$, and</li>
>      <li>each element of $A[t + 1 \ldots r]$ is greater than $A[q]$.</li>
>    </ul>
>    Like `PARTITION`, your `PARTITION'` procedure should take $\Theta(r - p)$
>    time.
> 3. Modify the `RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT` procedure to call `PARTITION'`, and name
>    the new procedure `RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT'`. Then modify the `QUICKSORT`
>    procedure to produce a procedure `QUICKSORT'(p, r)` that calls
>    `RANDOMIZED-PARTITION'` and recurses only on partitions of elements not
>    know to be equal to each other.
> 4. Using `QUICKSORT'`, how would you adjust the analysis of section 7.4.2 to
>    avoid the assumption that all elements are distinct?

### Running time

It will be $\Theta(n^2)$, because each split will be (n-1)-to-1 (see exercise
7.1-2).

### Implementation

The code is below.

`PARTITION'` is very similar to `PARTITION`, except that after it completes
arranging the elements around a pivot $q$, it moves all elements $t > q: A[t] =
x$ right after $q$. That way we get a chuck of equal elements after the pivot.

The procedure makes another pass at the array, which is at most $n$ more time
and becuse $\Theta(n) + \Theta(n) = \Theta(n) = \Theta(r - p)$ we fulfill the
condition.

### Analysis

The analysis does not change much. Section 7.4.2 uses the knowledge that the
elements are distinct in order to determine when two elements cannot be
compared. It will still be true that in any interval $Z_{ij}$, two elements
will get compared only if $z_i$ or $z_j$ gets picked as a pivot first. This
would not hold with `PARTITION'` if there are repeated elements.

Note that with this implementation, the number of comparisons increases, but
only by a constant factor. The results from the analysis are the same.
