## Stack depth for quicksort

> The `QUICKSORT` algorithm of Section 7.1 contains two recursive calls to
> itself. After `QUICKSORT` calls `PARTITION`, it recursively sorts the left
> subarray and then it recursively sorts the right subarray. The second
> recursive call in `QUICKSORT` is not really necessary; we can avoid it by
> using an iterative control structure. This technique, called **tail
> recursion**, is provided automatically by good compilers. Consider the
> following version of quicksort, which simulates tail recursion:
>
>     TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT(A, p, r)
>       while p < r
>           // Partition and sort left subarray
>           q = PARTITION(A, p, r)
>           TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT(A, p, q - 1)
>           p = q + 1
>
> 1. Argue that `TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT(A, 1, A.length)` correctly sorts the
>    array $A$.
>
> Compilers usually execute recursive procedures by using a **stack** that
> contains pertinent information, including the parameter values, for each
> recursive call. The information for the most recent call is at the top of the
> stack, and the information for the initial call is at the bottom. Upon
> calling a procedure, its information is **pushed** onto the stack; when it
> terminates, its information is **popped**. Since we assume that array
> parameters are represented by pointers, the information for each procedure
> call on the stack requires $\O(1)$ stack space. The **stack depth** is the
> maximum amount of stack space used at any time during a computation.
>
> 2. Describe a scenario in which `TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT`'s stack depth is
>    $\Theta(n)$ on an $n$-element input array.
> 3. Modify the code for `TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT` so that the worst-case
>    stack depth is $\Theta(\lg{n})$. Maintain the $\O(n\lg{n})$ expected
>    running time of the algorithm.

### Argue correctness

The original version partitions the array and then calls `QUICKSORT` one on
each side. This version does the same, although in a different fashion -
instead of calling `TAIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT`, it just changes `p` and restarts
the loop. It amounts to the same.

This is a straightforward tail-call unrolling.

### Linear stack depth

This will happen whenever partition returns $r$. That is, whenever the array is
sorted.

### Modified algorithm

We are always doing a tail-recursive call on the second partition. We can
modify the algorithm to do the tail recursion on the larger partition. That
way, we'll consume less stack.
