## Median-of-3 partition

> One way to improve the `RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT` procedure is to partition
> around a pivot that is chosen more carefully than by picking a random element
> from the subarray. One common approach is the **median-of-3** method: choose
> the pivot as the median (middle element) of a set of 3 elements randomly
> selected from the subarray. (See exercise 7.4-6.) For this problem, let us
> assume that the elements of the input array $A[1 \ldots n]$ are distinct and
> that $n \ge 3$. We denote the sorted output array by $A'[1 \ldots n]$. Using
> the median-of-3 method to choose the pivot element $x$, define $p_i = \Pr\\{x
> = A'[i]\\}$.
>
> 1. Give an exact formula for $p_i$ as a function of $n$ and $i$ for $i = 2,
>    3, \ldots, n - 1$. (Note that $p_1 = p_n = 0$.)
> 2. By what amount have we increased the likelihood of choosing the pivot as
>    $x = A'[\lfloor(n+1)/2\rfloor]$, the median of $A[1 \ldots n]$, compared with
>    the ordinary implementation? Assume that $n \to \infty$, and give the
>    limiting ratio of these probabilities.
> 3. If we define a "good" split to mean choosing the pivot as $x = A'[i]$,
>    where $n/3 \le i \le 2n/3$, by what amount have we increased the
>    likelihood of getting a good split compared with the ordinary
>    implementation? (<i>Hint</i>: Approximate the sum by an integral.)
> 4. Argue that in the $\Omega(n\lg{n})$ running time of quicksort, the
>    median-of-3 method affects only the constant factor.

### Probability

There are $n!/(n-3)!$ 3-permutations of all possible picks. In order to have
the $i$th element, we need to pick one smaller, the $i$th element and one
larger. There are $i - 1$ ways to pick a smaller one and $n-i$ ways to pick the
larger. There are $3! ways to arrange how the three elements are picked. Thus:

$$ p_i = \frac{6(i-1)(n-i)}{n(n-1)(n-2)} $$

### Improvement

$$ \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{6(i-1)(n-i)}{n(n-1)(n-2)}/\frac{1}{n}
 = \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{6n(n/2 - 1)(n/2)}{(n-1)(n-2)}
 = \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{6(n^2 - 2n)}{4(n^2 - 3n + 2)}
 = \frac{6}{4} $$

We get a $1.5$ improvement, which does not seem that much.

### Improvement

From exercise 7.2-6 we know that we get a "good" split with probability $1 -
2(1/3) = 1/3$. As for the probability of getting a good split with median-of-3:

$$ \begin{align}
   \lim_{n \to \infty}\sum_{i=n/3}^{2n/3}\frac{6(i-1)(n-i)}{n(n-1)(n-2)} &=
     \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{6}{n(n-1)(n-2)}\sum_{i=n/3}^{2n/3}(i-1)(n-i) \\\\
     &= \lim_{n \to \infty}\binom{n}{3}\int_{n/3}^{2n/3}(i-1)(n-1)\mathrm{d}i \\\\
        & \quad \Bigg( \int(i-1)(n-1)\mathrm{d}i = \frac{1}{6}(3ni^2 - 6ni - 2i^3 + 3i^2) \Bigg) \\\\
     &= \lim_{n \to \infty}\binom{n}{3}\frac{1}{6}\bigg[
          \frac{36}{27}n^3 - \frac{16}{27}n^3 + o(n^3) -
          \frac{9}{27}n^3 + \frac{2}{27}n^3 + o(n^3)
        \bigg] \\\\
    &= \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{1}{n(n-1)(n-2)} \frac{13}{27}(n^3 + o(n^3)) \\\\
    &= \lim_{n \to \infty}\frac{13}{27}\frac{n^3 + o(n^3)}{n^3 + o(n^3)} \\\\
    &= \frac{13}{27}
   \end{align} $$

Thus, as $n$ grows, the chance of getting a "good" split converges to $13/27$. The improvement is:

$$ \frac{13}{27} \div \frac{1}{3} = \frac{39}{27} \approx 1.444(4) $$

### Improvement

The running time would improve if the new approach can always pick a good
split. Unfortunatelly, it can't. It makes it impossible for one of the splits
to be empty, but it can still pick a $1$-to-$n-2$ split. It improves the
probability of a good split and adds some overhead to picking the pivot, but it
makes no hard guarantees on the quality of the split. Thus, the algorithm
remains $\Omega(n\lg{n})$ and $\O(n^2)$.
