## Probabilstic counting

> With a $b$-bit counter, we can ordinarily only count up to $2^b - 1$. With R.
> Morris's **probabilistic counting**, we can count up to a much larger value
> at the expense of some loss of precision.
>
> We let a counter value of $i$ represent that a count of $n_i$ for
> $i = 0, 1, \ldots, 2^b-1$, where the $n_i$ form an increasing sequence of
> nonnegative values. We assume that the initial value of the counter is 0,
> representing a count of $n_0 = 0$. The `INCREMENT` operation works on a
> counter containing the value $i$ in a probabilistic manner. If $i = 2^b - 1$,
> then the operation reports an overflow error. Otherwise, the `INCREMENT`
> operation increases the counter by 1 with probability $1/(n_{i+1} - n_i)$,
> and it leaves the counter unchanged with probability $1-1/(n_{i+1} - n_i)$.
>
> If we select $n_i = i$ for all $i \ge 0$, then the counter is an ordinary
> one. More interesting situations arise if we select, say, $n_i = 2^{i-1}$ for
> $i > 0$ or $n_i = F_i$ (the $i$th Fibonacci number - see Section 3.2).
>
> For this problem, assume that $n_{2^b-1}$ is large enough that the
> probability of an overflow error is negligible.
>
> 1. Show that the expected value represented by the counter after $n$
>    `INCREMENT` operations have been performed is exactly $n$.
> 2. The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter
>    depends on the sequence of the $n_i$. Let us consider a simple case: $n_i
>    = 100i$ for all $i \ge 0$. Estimate the variance in the value represented
>    by the register after $n$ `INCREMENT` operations have been performed.

### Expected value

Suppose at the start of the $j$th increment, the counter holds $i$, which
represents $n_i$. If the counter increases, then the value it will increase by
$n_{i+1} - n_i$. It happens with probability $1/(n_{i+1} - n_i)$, and so:

$$ \begin{align}
     \E[X_j] &= 0 \cdot \Pr\\{\text{stays same}\\} + 1 \cdot \Pr\\{\text{increases}\\} \\\\
             &= 0 \cdot \bigg(1 - \frac{1}{n_{i+1} - n_i}\bigg) +
                1 \cdot \bigg((n_{i+1} - n_i) \cdot \frac{1}{n_{i+1} - n_i}\bigg) \\\\
             &= 1
   \end{align} $$

This is the expectation any increment. Since there are $n$ increments, the
execpted value will be $n$.

### Variance

The variance of a single increment.

$$ \begin{align}
   \Var[X_j] &= \E[X_j^2] - \E^2[X_j] \\\\
             &= \bigg(0^2 \cdot \frac{99}{100} + 100^2 \frac{1}{100}\bigg) - 1 \\\\
             &= 99
   \end{align} $$

As for the variance of the total value:

$$ \Var[X] = \Var[X_1 + X_2 + \ldots + X_n] = \sum_{i=1}^n\Var[X_i] = 99n $$
