## Manipulating asymptotic notation

> Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be asymptotically positive functions. Prove the
> following identities:
>
> 1. $\Theta(\Theta(f(n))) = \Theta(f(n))$
>
> 2. $\Theta(f(n)) + \O(f(n)) = \Theta(f(n))$
>
> 3. $\Theta(f(n)) + \Theta(g(n)) = \Theta(f(n) + g(n))$
>
> 4. $\Theta(f(n)) \cdot \Theta(g(n)) = \Theta(f(n) \cdot g(n))$
>
> 5. Argue that for any real constants $a_1, b_1 > 0$ and integer constants
>    $k_1, k_2$, the following asymptotic bound holds:
>    $$ (a_1 n)^{k_1} \lg^{k_2}(a_2 n) = \Theta(n^{k_1} \lg^{k_2} n) $$
>
> 6. $\star$ Prove that for $S \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$, we have:
>    $$ \sum_{k \in S}{\Theta(f(k))} = \Theta\Bigg(\sum_{k \in S}f(k)\Bigg)$$
>     assuming both sums converge
>
> 7. $\star$ Show that for $S \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$, the following asymptotic
>    bound does not necessarily hold, even asuming that both products converge,
>    by giving a counterexample:
>    $$ \prod_{k \in S}{\Theta(f(k))} = \Theta\Bigg(\prod_{k \in S}f(k)\Bigg)$$

I'm going to heavily abuse notation, to the point this is no proof at all,
formally speaking.

### a. $\Theta(\Theta(f(n))) = \Theta(f(n))$

For the $\O$ case:

$$ \O(\O(f(n)) \le \O(c_1 f(n)) \le c_2 c_1 f(n) = \O(f(n)) $$

Works the same in the other direction.

### b. $\Theta(f(n)) + \O(f(n)) = \Theta(f(n))$

For the $\O$ case:

$$
  \Theta(f(n)) + \O(f(n)) \le \O(f(n)) + \O(f(n)) \le c_1 f(n) + c_2 f(n)
  = (c_1 + c_2) f(n) = \Theta(f(n))
$$

Works the same for $\Omega$.

### c. $\Theta(f(n)) + \Theta(g(n)) = \Theta(f(n) + g(n))$

This time we'll use the fact that we can pick any constant $c$ and pick the same
constant for both functions:

$$
  \Theta(f(n)) + \Theta(g(n)) \le cf(n) + cg(n) = c\big(f(n) + g(n)\big)
    = \O(f(n) + g(n)
$$

Works the same in the other direction.

### d. $\Theta(f(n)) \cdot \Theta(g(n)) = \Theta(f(n) \cdot g(n))$

The functions are asymptotically, which makes the inequalities hold when we
substitute with a constant multiplied by the function.

$$
  \Theta(f(n)) \cdot \Theta(g(n)) \le c_1 f(n) \cdot \Theta(g(n))
    \le c_1 f(n) \cdot c_2 g(n) = (c_1 + c_2)\big(f(n) + g(n)\big)
    = \O(f(n) + g(n))
$$

### e. Argue that $ (a_1 n)^{k_1} \lg^{k_2}(a_2 n) = \Theta(n^{k_1} \lg^{k_2} n) $

This function is neat enough so that if you apply all the manipulations we
looked at above, you get to it fairly easily.

### f and g. Infinite sums and infinite products

**UNSOLVED**. I don't quite understand this. I'm going to pass on this one.
