## Correctness of Horner's rule

> The following code fragment implements Horner's rule for evaluating a
> polynomial
>
> $$ \begin{align}
>    P(x) &= \sum_{k=0}^n a_kx^k = \\\\
>         &= a_0 + x(a_1 + x(a_2 + \cdots + x(a_{n-1} + xa_n) \cdots))
>    \end{align} $$
>
> given the coefficients $a_0, a_1, \ldots ,a_n$ and a value for $x$:
>
>     y = 0
>     for i = n downto 0
>         y = aᵢ + x·y
>
> 1. In terms of $\Theta$-notation, what is the running time of this code
>    fragment for Horner's rule?
>
> 2. Write pseudocode to implement the naive polynomial-evaluation algorithm
>    that computes each term of the polynomial from scratch. What is the
>    running time of this algorithm? How does it compare to Horner's rule?
>
> 3. Consider the following loop invariant:
>    > At the start of each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 2-3,
>    >
>    > $$ y = \sum_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k $$
>    >
>    > Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling 0. Following the
>    > structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter, use
>    > this loop invariant to show that, at termination,
>    > $y = \sum_{k=0}^na_kx^k$.
>
> 4. Conclude by arguing that the given code fragment correctly evaluates a
>    polynomial characterized by the coefficients $a_0,a_1,\ldots,a_n$.

### 1. Running time

Obviously $\Theta(n)$.

### 2. Naive algorithm

We assume that we have no exponentiation in the language. Thus:

    y = 0
    for i = 0 to n
        m = 1
        for k = 1 to n
            m = m·x
        y = y + aᵢ·m

The running time is $\Theta(n^2)$, because of the nested loop. It is,
obviosly, slower.

### 3. The loop invariant

**Initialization:** It is pretty trivial, since the summation has no terms,
which implies $y = 0$.

**Maintenance:** By using the loop invariant, in the end of the $i$-th
iteration, we have:

$$ \begin{align}
     y &= a_i + x\sum_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k
        = a_ix^0 + \sum_{k=0}^{n-i-1}a_{k+i+1}x^{k+1} = \\\\
       &= a_ix^0 \sum_{k=1}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k
        = \sum_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k
  \end{align} $$

**Termination:** The loop terminates at $i = -1$. If we substitute, we get:

$$ y = \sum_{k=0}^{n-i-1}a_{k+i+1}x^k = \sum_{k=0}^na_kx^k $$

### 4. Conclude

It should be fairly obvious, but the invariant of the loop is a sum that
equals a polynomial with the given coefficients.
