> Imagine that you wish to exchange one currency for another. You realize that
> instead of directly exchanging one currency for another, you might be better
> of making a series of trades through other currencies, winding up with the
> currency you want. Suppose that you can trade $n$ different currencies,
> numbered $1, 2, \ldots, n$, where you start with currency $1$ and wish to wind
> up with currency $n$. You are given, for each pair of currencies $i$ and $j$,
> an exchange rate $r_{ij}$, meaning that if you start with $d$ units of
> currency $i$, you can trade for $dr_{ij}$ units of currency $j$. A sequence of
> trades may entail a commission, which depends on the number of trades you
> make. Let $c_k$ be the commission that you are charged when you make $k$
> trades. Show that, if $c_k = 0$ for all $k = 1, 2, \ldots, n$, then the
> problems of finding the best sequence of exchanges from currency $1$ to
> currency $n$ exhibits optimal substructure. The show that if commissions $c_k$
> are arbitrary values, then the problem of finding the best sequence of
> exchanges from currency $1$ to currency $n$ does not necessarily exhibit
> optimal substructure.

If $c_k = 0$, we can use the reasoning from the chapter. Let $t = 1
\rightsquigarrow a_1 \rightsquigarrow a_2 \rightsquigarrow \ldots
\rightsquigarrow j$ be the optimal trade. If we pick any $a_k$, then both $p = 1
\rightsquigarrow a_1 \rightsquigarrow \ldots \rightsquigarrow a_k$ and $q = a_k
\rightsquigarrow a_{k+1} \rightsquigarrow \ldots \rightsquigarrow j$ are optimal
trades. If we assume otherwise, then there is a sequence $p'$ that is better
than $p$, and we can use it trade $p' \rightsquigarrow q$, which would be a
better trade than $t$, which is a contradiction.

Now let's look at when commissions become a problem. Let's have 4 currencies,
with the following trades:

```generate-dot
digraph {
  rankdir="LR";

  node[shape=circle];
  edge[weight=2];
  1 -> 2 [label="x2"];
  2 -> 3 [label="x2"];
  3 -> 4 [label="x2"];

  edge[weight=1];
  1 -> 3 [label="x3"];
}
```

Let's assume that unmarked trades are just not good enough. Let's also have:

$$ c_0 = 0, c_1 = 1, c_2 = 2, c_3 = 50, c_4 = 50, \ldots $$

That is, the first two trades are cheap, but then it gets problematic. Let's
assume we have $10$ units of currency $1$ and look at some optimal ways to trade
$x \rightsquigarrow y$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  1 \rightsquigarrow 4 &= 1 \rightarrow 3 \rightarrow 4
    = 10 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 - c_1 - c_2 = 60 - 1 - 2 &= 57 \\\\
  1 \rightsquigarrow 3 &= 1 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 3
    = 10 \cdot 2 \cdot 2 - c_1 - c_2 = 40 - 1 - 2 &= 37 \\\\
  3 \rightsquigarrow 4 &= 3 \rightarrow 4
    = 10 \cdot 2 - c_1 = 20 - 1 &= 19 \\\\
\end{aligned}
$$

The optimal way to trade $1 \rightsquigarrow 3$ would be to go through $2$
yielding $37$, instead of directly, yielding $29$. But if we combine that with
the optimal way to go $3 \rightsquigarrow 4$, we get:

$$
  1 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 3 \rightarrow 4 = 10 \cdot 2 \cdot 2 \cdot 2 - c_1
  - c_2 - c_3 = 80 - 1 - 2 - 50 = 27
$$

Which is much less than $57$ if we just perform 2 trades.
