> Professor Gallup wants to create a **random sample** of the set $\\{1, 2, 3,
> \ldots, n\\}$, that is, an $m$-element subset $S$, where $0 \le m \le n$, such
> that each $m$-subset is equally likely to be created. One way to set $A[i] =
> i$, for $i = 1, 2, 3, \ldots, n$, call `RANDOMLY-PERMUTE(A)`, and then take
> just the first $m$ array elements. This method takes $n$ calls to the `RANDOM`
> procedure. In Professor Gallup's application, $n$ is much larger than $m$, and
> so the professor wants to create a random sample with fewer calls to `RANDOM`
>
>     RANDOM-SAMPLE(m,n)
>       S = ∅
>       for k = n - m + 1 to n
>         i = RANDOM(1,k)
>         if i ∈ S
>             S = S ∪ {k}
>         else
>             S = S ∪ {i}
>         return S
>
> Shwo that the procedure `RANDOM-SAMPLE` on the previous page returns a random
> $m$-subset $S$ of $\\{1, 2, 3, \ldots, n\\}$, in which each $m$-subset is
> equally likely, while making only $m$ calls to `RANDOM`.

Each combination should have a $1/\binom{n}{m}$ chance of showing up. Let's
establish an invariant for `RANDOM-SAMPLE(m,n)`. We are going to go with:

> `RANDOM-SAMPLE(m,n)` returns a uniformly distributed combination.

We shall do induction on $m$. It's trivially so when $m$ is 1 (or 0). Let's
assume the invariant holds for $m-1$. Let's see what happens when we pass $m$.

The recursive call returns an $m-1$ sample with uniform probability. There are
two options - either the new $m$-subset includes $n$ or not.

If that happens (probability: $m/n$), the probability for each combination
including $n$ is:

$$ \frac{m}{n}\bigg(1/\binom{n-1}{m-1}\bigg) = 1/\binom{n}{m} $$

If it does not (probability: $(n-m)/n$), it includes one of the $(n-m)$ numbers
not present. The chance for each is:

$$ \frac{n-m}{n}\bigg(1/\binom{n-1}{m}\bigg) = 1/\binom{n}{m} $$
