> Suggest how to allocate and deallocate storage for elements within the hash
> table itself by linking all unused slots into a free list. Assume that one
> slot can store a flag and either one element plus a pointer or two pointers.
> All dictionary and free-list operations should run in $\O(1)$ expected time.
> Does the free list need to be doubly linked or does a singly linked free list
> suffice?

Oh, wow. That was a doozy.

First of all, in my 15+ years of professional programming and 20+ years of just
coding, this is absolutely the first time I implement a hash table. Can you
believe it? It's worth a celebration.

Second, this is a bit exotic. It involves a few things:

* Doubly linked lists with sentinels
* Maintaining a free list
* Hash tables

## Explanation

The key phrase in the problem definition is "expected time". There's no way to
solve this in constant time if every key hashes to the same bucket.

### How?

Well, each element of the table is either:

* `{free : boolean = false, value : element, next : pointer}`, when the slot is
  taken. `element` holds the value of the stored item, and `next` points to the
  next node in the chain.
* `{free : boolean = true, prev : pointer, next : pointer}`, when the slot is
  empty. `prev` and `next` form a doubly linked list with a sentinel stored in
  the hash table.

When we initialize the hash table, we need to iterate it and make sure that each
slot is linked together in a free list.

To allocate a slot, we remove it from the free list by modifying `prev` and
`next` to point to each other, and setting `free` to false.

To return a slot to the free list, we set `free` to true and insert it in the
beginning.

### Searching

Nothing really changes, apart from a small optimization - if the head of a chain
in a bucket hashes to a value, different than the bucket index, we can treat
this slot as empty (it's hosting an element for another chain). We don't need to
walk it.

### Inserting

There are three possibilities:

1. The bucket slot is empty. We allocate the slot (setting `free = true` and
   removing it from the free list), and put the element in there with an empty
   `next`.

2. The bucket slot contains an element with the same hash value. We allocate a
   new slot, and insert it after the head of the chain (avoids moving items).

3. The bucket slot contains an element with a different hash value. This means
   the slot is hosting an element from another chain. We need to relocate it to
   another empty slot and update the chain by starting from the head (which we
   can find with the hash value) and finding the pointer we need to update. Once
   the element has been reallocated, we can insert like in step 2.

### Deleting

We hash the value to `h` and lookup the `h`-th slot.

While the slot's value matches the value we need to delete, we copy the next
element in the chain over, and free its slot. We repeat that until the chain is
empty, or until it starts with an element with the same hash, but different
value.

We proceed with the rest of the chain to remove the other elements that match
the value, returning slots to the free list.

### Does the free list need to be doubly linked?

Yes.

Otherwise, reserving a free slot will be linear to the size of the free list
(e.g. the size of the hash), because we're not interested in _any_ free slot,
but rather _a specific_ free slot.

## Code

If the above didn't make sense, hopefully the code below might:
