## Weighted median

> For $n$ distinct elements $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ with positive weights
> $w_1, w_2, \ldots, w_n$ such that $\sum_{i=1}^n w_i = 1$, the **weighted
> (lower) median** is the element $x_k$ satisfying
>
> $$ \sum_{x_i < x_k} w_i < \frac{1}{2} $$
> and
> $$ \sum_{x_i > x_k} w_i \le \frac{1}{2} $$
>
> For example, if the elments are $0.1, 0.35, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.05, 0.2$ and
> each element equals its weight (that is, $w_i = x_i$ for $i = 1, 2, \ldots,
> 7$, then the median is $0.1$, but the weighted median is $0.2$.
>
> <ol type="a">
>   <li>Argue that the median of $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$ is the weighted
>   median of $x_i$ with weights $w_i = 1/n$ for $i = 1, 2, \ldots, n$.
>   <li>Show how to compute the weighted median of $n$ elements in
>   $\O(n\lg{n})$ worst-case time using sorting.
>   <li>Show how to compute the weighted median in $\Theta(n)$ worst-case time
>   using a linear-time median algorithm such as `SELECT` from Section 9.3.
> </ol>
>
> The **post-office location problem** is defined as follows. We are given $n$
> points $p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_n$ with associated weights $w_1, w_2, \ldots,
> w_n$. We wish to find a point $p$ (not necessarily one of the input points)
> that minimizes the sum $\sum_{i=1}^n w_i d(p,p_i)$, where $d(a, b)$ is the
> distance between the points $a$ and $b$.
>
> <ol type="a" start="4">
>   <li>Argue that the weighted median is a best solution for the
>   1-dimensional post-office location problem, in which points are simply
>   real numbers and the distance between points $a$ and $b$ is $d(a,b) = |a -
>   b|$.
>   <li>Find the best solution for the 2-dimensional post-office location
>   problem, in which the points are $(x,y)$ coordinate pairs and the distance
>   between points $a = (x_1, y_1)$ and $b = (x_2, y_2)$ is the **Manhattan
>   distance** given by $d(a, b) = |x_1 - x_2| + |y_1 - y_2|$.
> </ol>

### Median and weighted median

If the weights all elements are $1/n$, then the sum of the weights of the
elements, smaller than the median, is $\lfloor \frac{n - 1}{2} \rfloor
\frac{1}{n}$ and the sum of the weights of the larger elements is $\lceil
\frac{n - 1}{2} \rceil \frac{1}{n}$. This satisfies the condition for weighted
median. Furthermore, choosing a smaller or greater value will not hold in the
condition.

### Computing with sorting

1. Sort the array
2. Start walking the array from left to right, accumulating the weights of the
   elements encountered
3. The first element with accumulated weight $w \ge 1/2$ is the weighted
   median

### Computing in linear time

It's a very similar to `SELECT`, but instead of passing $i$, we pass a number
around which the weights should partition (initially $1/2$). We find a good
pivot in linear time and we partition around it. When we sum the weights in
the lower part of the array and the weights in the upper part. If they fulfill
the condition, we have our weighted median.

### 1-dimensional post-office location problem

I'll present an informal argument, since it is convincing enough. A more
formal one can be found in the instructor's manual.

The situation is similar to exercise 9.3.8. Let's assume that we pick the
weighted median as the solution and then start moving left or right. As we
move away from the weighted median (in any direction), we're moving towards
elements with combined weight less than $1/2$ and away from elements wight
combined weight greater than $1/2$. Every "step" we take, we're increasing the
total distance.

### 2-dimensional post-office location problem with Manhattan distance

The solution is finding $(x_m, y_m)$ where those are the weighted medians of
the $x$- and $y$- coordinates.

I'm not even going to start proving this formally, since it requires
mathematics above my current comfort level. Reasoning informally, by the
definition of Manhattan distance, the $x$ coordinates and the $y$ coordinates
are independent ­ we can rearrange the $x$ in any way we want, without
affecting the $y$ coordinate of the solution and vice-versa.
